# What is contrastive learning?

Contrastive learning is a machine learning approach that involves training a
model to distinguish between pairs of related and unrelated examples. This is
done by providing the model with pairs of examples, where one example is
considered "positive" (related) and the other is considered "negative" (
unrelated), and training the model to maximize the similarity between the
positive examples and minimize the similarity between the positive and negative
examples.

Contrastive learning is often used to learn representations of data that are
useful for downstream tasks, such as classification or clustering. By training a
model to distinguish between related and unrelated examples, the model can learn
to encode the important differences and similarities between the examples, which
can improve its performance on the downstream tasks.

Contrastive learning has been applied to many different tasks and domains,
including natural language processing, computer vision, and speech recognition.
It has been shown to be effective at learning useful representations of data
from limited amounts of training data, and it has been used to improve the
performance of many different machine learning models.


For example, imagine you have a dataset of images of different animals, and you
want to train a model to recognize the different species of animals in the
images. Using contrastive learning, you could train the model by providing it
with pairs of images, where one image is of a dog and the other is of a cat (
positive pair), and another image is of a dog and a bird (negative pair). The
model would learn to maximize the similarity between the images of the dog and
the cat, and minimize the similarity between the images of the dog and the bird.
This would allow the model to learn useful representations of the images that
can be used to recognize the different species of animals.